Chunking Documentation

DEFINITIONS:

`chunk`:
    Description:    a structure of metadata to describe a group of blocks in 3d
                    space.

    - diameter of 16 blocks, volume of 16^3 blocks.

    - has 3d position, each axis being 2-bytes (good enough for the world's size
      limits).

    - has memory handle to point to a blocks portion in `chunk_buf`.

    - has index: this is its own index in `chunk_tab`, given to it by a push to
      `chunk_buf`, modified by chunk shifter (see 'Chunk Table'),
      consumed by chunk schedulers (see 'Chunk Scheduler').

    - has a push cursor to keep progress of block generation, because generation
      is limited by a 'block parse rate' (how many blocks can be processed per
      chunk per frame), if that limit is reached, the chunk will stop processing
      and continue where it left off on next frame.

`chunk_data`:
    Description:    raw block data.

    - has a flag that tells whether the data is orphaned or not.

Chunk Region `chunk_region`:
    Description:    area of 32^3 chunks in 3d space.

DATA:

Chunk Metadata `chunk_meta`:
    Description:    chunk metadata buffer, stores chunk metadata like a stack.


Chunk Buffer `chunk_buf`:
    Description:    raw block data buffer, stores block data like a stack.

    - has a push cursor that searches for the first empty slot.
    - any index can be popped, but blocks will not be deleted, just overwritten
      when a new chunk is pushed.
    - cursor returns to the popped index if it is earlier than cursor position.

Chunk Table `chunk_tab`:
    Description:    3d look-up table of chunk pointers that point to `chunk_buf`
                    addresses.

    - it arranges chunks based on their position relative to the player, where
      player's current chunk is always the center-most index of the table.

    - when a chunk is pushed into `chunk_buf`, its address is given to the
      corresponding index in `chunk_tab` using the difference between chunk
      position in world and player position in world.

    - when a player crosses a chunk boundary, all the addresses in `chunk_tab`
      shift the opposite direction of the boundary crossed, to compensate for
      player position.

    - the table shifter updates player chunk position cached in player data
      itself and then diffs it with player chunk position delta, also cached in
      player data, if they don't match, the table will shift again till the two
      match, since the player can cross one or more chunk boundaries per frame.

    - when the table shifts, the indices at the furthest position from the
      player get wrapped around into the new area of chunks the player is moving
      twoards, reset and re-generated as the new chunks.

Chunk Order `chunk_order`:
    Description:    3d look-up table of chunk pointer pointers that point to
                    `chunk_tab` addresses.

    - it arranges `chunk_tab` indices based on their distance from the
      center-most index.

    - there are a couple chunk order arrangements saved to disk for every render
      distance setting, the respective lookup will be loaded when
      render-distance setting changes.

    - if a look-up is not found on disk, it will be generated (the process is
      taxing).

    - useful for rendering by distance, generating closer chunks first, and
      dedicating spherical areas of chunks around the player to different
      parsing schedulers, each with their priority level.

Chunk Limiter `chunks_max`:
    Description:    array of maximum chunk counts at each render distance
                    setting, used mainly as an upper-bound to `chunk_order`
                    traversal.

Chunk Parser `chunk_sched`:
    desription:     dirty-chunk scheduler, FIFO ring-buffer.

    - processes chunk generation, meshing, modification, importing and
      exporting.
    - each scheduler has to wait for the previous one to finish processing in
      order to start parsing, but all can schedule chunks without waiting for
      each other, because enqueuing isn't remotely as costly as chunk
      generation.

    - chunk_sched 1: closest sphere of chunks to player, parses almost
      instantly, small size.

    - chunk_sched 2: mid-range sphere of chunks, excluding scheduler 1's area, 
      parses a bit slower, because less urgent, medium size.

    - chunk_sched 3: parses everything visible after scheduler 2's area, slow
      parser, big size, but parses everything after second scheduler's area
      (sometimes unused due to render distance being too small to get to that
      area).

    - chunk_sched 4: region parser and exporter, biggest scheduler, slowest
      parsing, four responsibilities:
        1. generate an entire region even if the player has touched a single
           chunk from it and even after player is no longer in area.
        2. guarantee generation unless player exits world or player teleports
           far, these chunks are almost always not visible to the player yet,
           and therefore, not urgent at all, but they will be generated when a
           partial chunk file is loaded again.
        3. wait for other schedulers to finish generation and listen to the
           requests they send, other schedulers request exporting of chunks
           they've already generated, in that meantime the exporter only
           collects positions of regions to export, when all schedulers are
           done, the exporter will grab what they generated and continue
           generating the rest.
        4. compress entire region into one big RLE (run-length encoding) blob
           and write to disk in '.hhcr' format (see 'Heaven-Hell Continuum
           Region File Format (hhcr)').

    - all schedulers must check disk for if the specific chunk has been
      generated, and generate chunks if not found.

    - each scheduler has their own 'chunk parse rate' (how many chunks can be
      processed per frame), if that limit is reached, the scheduler will
      stop processing and continue where it left off on next frame.

    - the rate is only spent when generating, not when loading from disk, the
      limit on loading from disk is the capacity of the scheduler itself.

    - when a visible chunk mid-generation gets out of render distance, it gets
      discarded and scheduler 4 will take care of it.

    - schedulers can steal jobs from each other; when the player moves closer
      to a busy chunk in a lower priority scheduler, it will move up in
      priority in respect to player distance, and will move down when the player
      moves away.

Chunk Parser Budget:
    Description:    amount of "work" that can be performed by a chunk scheduler
                    per frame.

    "Work" Costs per Chunk:
        - generation: 64 points.
        - meshing: 16 points.
        - exporting: 8 points.
        - importing: 8 points.
        - scheduling: 4 point.
        - de-scheduling: 4 point.

    - the budget is consumed by chunks being processed within a scheduler,
      when the budget is drained, the scheduler skips parsing and continues next
      frame with a fresh budget.

    - chunk importing will still mesh the chunk afterwards, because meshing is
      cheap relative to the contrary: use some disk space for mesh data +
      majorly break RLE compression therefore bloating mesh file size
      significantly.

DEBUG TOOLS:

Chunk Bounds:
    Description:    player current chunk's bounding box.

Chunk Gizmo:
    Description:    tiny 3d representation of `chunk_tab` entries in the form of
                    cubes.

    - appears with <Alt + G> at the top-right corner of the HUD.
    - cubes are colored to represent chunk status:
        brown: generated.
        green: has non-air blocks.

Chunk Scheduler Visualizer:
    Description:    shows sceduled status of chunks, coolest thing in the game.

    - appears with <Alt + V>.
    - shows bounding boxes of sceduled chunks for processing:
        green: in sceduler 1.
        orange: in sceduler 2.
        red: in sceduler 3.
        purple: in sceduler 4.
